Libraries
	ldd -- shows required shared libs (dependencies) of a program
	ldconfig -- run this when a change is made to libs
	/etc/ld.so.conf.d - add new libs here
boot
	grub
		how to install grub - grand unified bootloader
			grub-install
		boot partition is max 528MB
		where is bootloader
			1st 512 bytes in MBR
			/boot/grub
			or /boot/efi
		configure grub
			The default configuration file for GRUB 2 is **`/boot/grub/grub.cfg`**. This file is automatically generated and manual editing is not recommended. To make changes to the GRUB configuration, you need to edit the file **`/etc/default/grub`** and then run the **`update-grub`** utility to generate a compliant file.

|      |                                                                                                                      |
| ---- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Note | `update-grub` is usually a shortcut to **`grub-mkconfig -o /boot/grub/grub.cfg`**, so they produce the same results. |
		where is menu list
			/boot/grub/menu.lst - this can be edited for grub legacy
			for grub 2 use /etc/grub.d/40_custom
		how to edit menu list
			When `update-grub` is run, GRUB 2 will scan for kernels and operating systems on the machine and generate the corresponding menu entries on the `/boot/grub/grub.cfg` file. 
		boot log - 
			dmesg --human
			journalctl -b or -k
		how to change boot options
			kernel parameters
				init=/bin/bash
				systemd.unit=graphical.target or rescue.target
				permanent change in /etc/default/grub: ```
				 GRUB_CMDLINE_LINUX_DEFAULT="quiet splash foo=bar"
				 
### get info commands
	lsmod
	lsusb
	lspci
	ldd nameofprogram
	vmstat
	iostat
	top
	ps
		ps aux (bsd options -- no -)
		ps -ef (Unix options with one -)
		ps --format (GNU options with 2 --)
	/proc
		cpuinfo
	jobs
		% +
	fg %1
	bg %1
		use & to start job in bg
	kill
		-l gives signals
		15 = SIGTERM (default)
		9 = SIGKILL (not susceptible)
	nice -- default is 0
		nice -n 10 top  -- starts top with nice value of 10
		negative values can only be assigned by root
	renice
		renice -10 222   -- subtract 10 from current nice value of PID 222
		renice +5 -g users  -- renice whole group -- -u for user
	watch -- run command repeatedly
		-n seconds
screen
	-t title
	ctrl-a d -- detach session  
	screen -r -- reattch
tmux
	-t title
	ctrl-b   s - see list  d - detach
	tmux a -t title  -- attach

	
SystemV
	init --help
	/etc/inittab
	telinit q - reloads inittab
	runlevel shows current
### systemd
	systemctl status unit.service
	**systemctl daemon-reload**
### systemd benefits
- Ease of configuration: **unit files** as opposed to **SysV Init scripts**.
- Versatile management: apart from daemons and processes, it also manages devices, sockets and mount points.
- Backward compatibility with both SysV Init and Upstart.
- Parallel loading during boot-up: **services are loaded in parallel** as opposed to Sysv Init loading them **sequentially**.
    
- It features a logging service called the _journal_ that presents the following advantages:
    - It centralizes all logs in one place.    
    - It does not require log rotation.    
    - Logs can be disabled, loaded in RAM or made persistent.
#### Units and Targets
`systemd` operates on _units_. A unit is any resource that `systemd` can manage (e.g. network, bluetooth, etc.). Units — in turn — are governed by _unit files_. These are plain text files which live in `/lib/systemd/system` and include the configuration settings — in the form of _sections_ and _directives_ — for a particular resource to be managed. There are a number of unit types: `service`, `mount`, `automount`, `swap`, `timer`, `device`, `socket`,`path`, `timer`, `snapshot`, `slice`, `scope` and `target`. Thus, every unit file name follows the pattern `<resource_name>.<unit_type>` (e.g. `reboot.service`).
A _target_ is a special type of unit which resembles the classic runlevels of SysV Init. This is because a _target unit_ brings together various resources to represent a particular system state (e.g. `graphical.target` is similar to `runlevel 5`, etc.). To check the current target in your system, use the `systemctl get-default` command